the ceasefire is in effect in Gaza and
an Airy Cal not seen in seven weeks
hangs over the strip the north is in
Ruins water and food are in short supply
so realistically how much humanitarian
Aid can be distributed in Just 4 days
this is Inside
Story
[Music]
hello welcome to the program I'm Tom
McCrae a ceasefire between Hamas
Fighters and Israeli troops is in effect
in Gaza at the core of the agreement is
an exchange the release of 50 Israeli
women in child captives held by Hamas
for the freedom of about 150
Palestinians detained in Israeli jails
in addition for the 4-day pors and
hostilities desperately needed
humanitarian Aid will be allowed into
Gaza
Hamas says about 200 trucks carrying
food water medical supplies and fuel
will enter the strip daily now that's a
fraction of the aid brought into Gaza
every day before the war then there are
logistical challenges large SES of the
strip have been reduced to rubble and
many roads are impassable and most of
the population has been displaced and
the time frame is tight there 4 days
long enough and will this Aid make a
difference especially if Israel resumes
its attacks when the ceasefire ends
we'll explore this with our guests in
just a moment but first this report by
Kaa Lopez
hon a break from the Relentless Israeli
bombings and air strikes Palestinians in
southern Gaza make their way back home
shortly after the 4-day ceasefire
between Hamas and Israel comes into
effect entire neighborhoods raised to
the ground with communities managing
loss and destruction as as best they
can we are full of Hope optimism and
pride in our resistance we're proud of
our achievements despite the pain this
caused we feel pride and
dignity 7 weeks into the war families
forced into mixhi shelters and Tents are
hoping this temporary pause will lead to
a permanent ceasefire living like this
they say is not
sustainable there's little food and
widespread hunger there's a lack of
management order and safety prices have
skyrocketed people have fled from the
north with nothing how can they afford
anything under the deal Hamas says about
200 trucks of humanitarian Aid will be
allowed into Gaza daily carrying food
medicine clean water and fuel to power
Hospital generators and dis salination
plants all basic items that have been
inured Supply since October the
7th I came here to get the flower
because there are 11 people in my family
and we've taken in 40 displaced
relatives and
friends the relief however may be
shortlived Israel says it will resume
its bombardment as soon as the ceasefire
is
over control over Northern Gaza is the
first step of a long War we will focus
on planning and fulfilling the next
stages of the
war 2.3 million Palestinians live in
Gaza most were dependent on humanitarian
Aid before the war now the UN estimates
80% of the population has been forcibly
displaced and with the threat of more
attacks questions are being raised about
whether 4 days of limited assistance
will be enough and whether it will reach
those who need it most Kia lope oan for
Inside
Story let's bring in our guest now in
rala is nabal fak the spokes person for
the Palestine red Cresent Society one of
the eight organizations coordinating
relief efforts in Gaza in Tel Aviv is AA
Elder a political analyst and columnist
for the Israeli newspaper heret and also
in rala is no OD a writer and political
analyst a warm welcome to you all thank
you very much for joining us here on
inside story nabal if I can begin with
you please as I mentioned the red crison
helps distribute Aid uh into Gaza can
you just give us an update on how that
has gone on since the ceasefire began
what you hearing from your teams on the
ground have there been any issues at all
at this stage in in getting Aid
in good evening thanks for having me so
these four days pause will allow the p
and red grass and teams along with honor
to receive more humanitarian Aid through
RAF crossing water that include fuel
food water medical supplies as well as
medicine the expectation is to receive
around 200 drugs truck although since
the beginning of the entry of a
humanitarian Aid the daily average is
only 45 uh trucks and let's remember
that before the escalation the number of
a trucks that were're getting into Gaza
Strip is around 500 trucks although
there there will be an increase of
receiving aid it's still a drop in the
ocean compared to the humanitarian
catastrophe that is uh in Gaza taken
into consideration that over two million
civilians now are lacking food water
medicine and fuel as well our teams will
do their best to distribute the aid and
deliver the aid to the most uh areas and
vulnerable areas to support the
Palestinians who are now uh internally
displeased in south of Gaza Strip the
situation in south of Gaza Strip is
disaster many Palestinian hundreds or
thousands are in streets with no place
to go to others are backing in schools
or even at hospital
so this Aid will support those
Palestinians try to elevate their
suffering a little bit by supporting
them and providing them with food water
relief items as well basically that now
it's a huge struggle for every
Palestinian in the South to find food or
water to the family because the the
market after seven weeks of continuous
escalation and after over a million and
a half Palestinians fled to the south of
Gaza Strip is now almost completely
empty as we've heard time and again this
is nowhere near enough even with the
increased in Aid during this ceasefire
nor there are so many moving parts to
all of this to the ceasefire it's
obviously extremely complicated and and
very very delicate how difficult do you
think it's going to be to enforce all of
the different aspects of it especially
uh getting Aid to those most in
need getting Aid I think will be the
most uh sensitive and the most
complicated um this all depends uh
basically on what Israel allows in um
and once the aid goes in and as we heard
from thebel it will not be nearly enough
but it will be an increase from uh uh
the trickle that was coming in over the
past 6 weeks um the question will remain
on whether enough Aid will be able to
reach people in the north where the
situation is quite dire and where they
haven't uh they've been cut off from the
world basically for all those weeks um
that I think will be one of the more
important tests of this tenuous
ceasefire yeah Kea you're in Tel and and
we know that the the captives has been
the biggest issue for Israel now that
the ceasefire is underway has how is all
of this being viewed there does the
humanitarian situation in Gaza and what
is happening to the Palestinians inside
the strip does that even get a mention
at this point in
time um well Tom I think that most
Israelis are actually hijacked by the
Israeli if you like propaganda and uh if
you like it's the reality and the
reality since uh October 7th is that
there is not enough compassion in the
hearts of the average Israeli for both
the Israeli captives the thousands of
people that are living nearby uh the the
victims of the uh vicious attack you
know like around my house where I'm
sitting right now in half a square
kilometer there are two families who
lost their sons and one family that uh
uh doesn't sleep a minute because they
wait to see uh what are the whereabouts
of their son a young Soldier 19 years
old uh my neighbor visited Washington
already twice met with President Biden
and uh I I'm afraid that for the first
time even people who belong to the
Israeli liberal left Merit Labor uh are
afraid to speak up their voices you know
the only newspaper that really covers it
isit and uh the minister of
communication just uh submitted a bill
to stop
advertising uh government a ads in in
our newspaper and uh to stop the uh
subscription of the all Ministries to
Har newspaper this gives you an idea to
of the the atmosphere when it comes for
it comes com to compassion for the
Palestinian refugees okay thank you for
for giving us a better understanding of
of I guess the the the sense and depth
of feeling uh there in Tel Aviv nbal I
just want to say uh that Oxfam described
the aid that's attached to this
ceasefire as a bandaid on a gaping wound
That's how little is getting in do you
think that enough priority uh has been
given to the amount of Aid that was
included in this deal so uh as for the
humanitarian Aid that was allowed to get
U into Gaza Strip up to this moment and
even with this increase of aid is it
still doesn't fulfill the needs of both
first the humanitarian needs which mean
the Urgent needs for over 2 million who
are in need for food water fuel as well
and also doesn't fulfill the need of the
health sector after uh most of the
hospitals went out of service now only
nine hospitals out of 35 are still
operating all hospitals are in desperate
need for refuel as well as ambulances we
are in urgent need for refuel to
continue providing our life saving
Services through hospitals as well as
ambulances the amount of fuel is
absolutely not enough and most
importantly during these pause uh there
as a palant were not allowed to
transport the aid to north of Gaza only
Ona for example will be today um
transporting two Aid trucks to two un
facilities in a other than that all
hospitals have completely went out of
service in Gaza City and north of Gaza
and up to this moment even with the
humanitarian pause we are unable to
transport medical supplies medicine and
Aid to north of Gaza and Gaza although
hundreds of thousands of Palestinians
are still there in Gaza Strip I know in
Gaza and the North many will be able to
evacuate themselves during these four
days how however many they will not
because basically there's elderly people
people with disabilities people who are
sick they will uh be unable to go uh
four hours or five hours walking to
evacuate themselves to the South and
those are in urgent need for medical
services they have the right to find a
hospital to receive them unfortunately
now if you live in Gaza or the North
there is not even a single hospital to
treat you yeah just heard from the World
Health Organization that say that they
are deeply concerned about the situation
for the 100 or so patients and staff
that remain at elifa hospital uh in the
north nor do you think that this is a
deliberate tactic by Israel to to limit
uh access for Palestinians to go back to
the north and and also indeed getting
Aid to those people that are still stuck
there absolutely look the humanitarian
um disaster in Gaza is um uh very
deliberate and Israel was very clear
from day one that they will create This
Disaster that they will starve Gaza out
of food water medicine and all uh you
know fundamentals of life and they're
making it extremely clear by
deconstructing uh debilitating
completely the health system in the
north of Gaza that they intend on making
Northern Gaza uninhabitable and to give
some perspective to the viewers Northern
Gaza Gaza City and the northern part not
only were the are the most densely
populated areas in the in the Gaza Strip
but they were also the center of Life
the center of Commerce of Education of
uh you know Civil Society so to make
that part unlivable is to make the Gaza
Strip uh unlivable and what we saw was a
normalization of that the world watching
as a shifa hospital was bombarded late
sieg to as patients died inside and as
patients remain languishing now unable
to get access to medical evacuation we
saw the Indonesia Hospital also uh uh um
attacked and made to go out of service
by Firepower by force um all of that is
happening this this humanitarian
disaster is not the result of a natural
disaster it is man-made and it is
maintained by political decision yeah
and many would say Obviously deliberate
ke as we we've alluded to there's always
been the accusation that Israel uses Aid
as a mechanism of War as a way to
control the population in Gaza is that
how you see it is that what is happening
here what's Happening Here is uh that uh
some Israelis see this humanitarian
disaster uh and uh the loss of lives of
children women people who are not
involved in violence as collateral
damage uh but the other on the other
hand former Major General the head of
the NSC wrote an article in a leading
Israeli
newspaper arguing that uh a plague and
humanitarian disaster is serving
Israel's interests because it deters
other Arabs other Palestinian
not to mess around uh that uh Israel
does not stop uh when it comes to uh
destroying an enemy and uh you can hear
Israel is comparing Gaza to Dresden and
mentioning the fact that after World War
II or during World War II um the Allies
have uh
destroyed um German cities and they
didn't have have mercy so uh Mercy uh is
not very popular these days and uh uh I
can some of my best friends whom I
considered Liberals are saying well we
know that the Hamas were hiding behind
civilians they're using hospitals and we
saw the footage so we can't take the
risk it's other our soldiers that have
to come in and clear the area or the
Palestinians so it's their
responsibility this is the argument uh
for the loss of life and the
humanitarian crisis after what they did
in October 7 so it's kind of a race who
is the real victim here yeah that
narrative interesting that it has
permeated almost all parts of Israeli
Society at this point in time uh nbal
Netanyahu has said that he was surprised
as well as disappointed that Aid
organizations hadn't set up uh sheltered
full full camps within so-called safe
zones within Gaza but is that because
there's a worry that they could turn
into full-time permanent settlements
which would I guess effectively just
further displace people within Gaza none
of the humanitarian agency enjoyed safe
access into Gaza Strip basically we are
facing great challenges implementing our
humanitarian Mission into Gaza Strip
starting from emergency medical services
provider who are under attack paramedics
healthcare workers ambulances are under
attack even the uh icrc as um when tried
to transport the aid to north of Gaza
Strip and to Gaza was under Target from
Israel military so basically this is a
huge challenge for or humanitarian
agencies in Gaza Strip just to ensure
the protection of our workers so we can
a able to provide our humanitarian
Mission okaya I want to uh get on to
what might happen next if this ceasefire
continues as it is at this point in time
uh being successful I mean Israel's
defense minister has said that the
overall war is war could likely continue
for two months after this uh ceasefire
ends I mean is there any appetite at all
for being extended within
Israel uh first of all uh What uh Israel
has in mind right now is to rearrange
its forces for the uh next round and uh
at the same time to try and get out more
captives and uh while Israel is
penetrating deeper into Gaza and uh the
chances of finding them alive is uh
decreasing uh the United States is also
joining the scene uh and putting
pressure Russia on both sides including
Qatar Egypt and uh uh even there are
some kind of uh
connections with Iran to stabilize the
uh region because uh just to remind you
Tom theah is part of the deal of the
ceasefire and if we go back to the to
escalation in Gaza um there might be at
the same time
escalation in other Frontiers including
also the West Bank which we didn't
mention but there are zills in the
Israeli settlements that are taking
advantage of the chaos uh while we are
talking about a humanitarian crisis in
Gaza uh there is not a humanitarian
crisis but uh there is more and more
violence and and a kind of uh silent
transfer from Palestinian Villages and
if the United States will not deal with
all those Frontiers comprehensively
simultaneously Gaza is not going to be
the top of uh the agenda on top of the
agenda we are going to see Regional
war no in light of that and if this
ceasefire is successful I mean it could
be start of further negotiations as
we've heard extensively especially from
the
qataris how would they be negotiated in
the days and weeks ahead do you think
and how difficult will it be to keep
these sides together I
think pushing the negotiations into a
more um uh detailed uh uh um nuanced uh
direction will be very difficult and I
think that's primarily because there
isn't enough um uh inter interal
pressure there isn't I I think enough of
an international vision of how this
monstrous war will end um as Akiva was
saying this is not just about Gaza what
is happening in Gaza even the
humanitarian crisis there is a product
of a political crisis and without
talking about a political solution that
will treat the situation in the entirety
of the occupied Palestinian territory
that will calm tensions with Lebanon
that will uh um make sure that this
doesn't spill over into a regional war
after the four days and even if they
extend to six or eight days we're
looking at a further deterioration at a
situation that is far worse than the
five or six weeks that have already
passed um but it doesn't up until now I
don't see many signals of an
American Vision for how this should go
or an American willingness in the Biden
Administration to push the sides in that
direction I think there would be enough
Arab pressure uh on Hamas and maybe
other Palestinian actors but I don't see
the uh Israeli government feeling enough
heat to talk end game and an end game
that is acceptable that is sustainable
not an end game where you would see
people forcibly displaced or an end game
where you would see the side of Gaza
shrink or an end game where you would
see the rest of the West Bank devoured
by the settlement regime that's I think
what is now imminent and what uh uh the
international attention should be
focused on
okaya do you think that Netanyahu is is
isn't really feeling the heat at this
point in time because we have heard
plenty about his political W I mean how
is he viewed now now that the ceasefire
is underway and how uh it goes how could
that influence what actually happens
next uh first of all netan has a clear
interest uh to make sure that uh this
ceasefire is just a kind of a break in a
very bad concert that uh you are forced
to go back and listen to it after the
short break and uh as long as uh the uh
uh guns are shooting uh
the uh political arena is quiet um he
will not be removed before the war is
over and you know the still the the
court is waiting for him uh the uh
Israeli public opinion is fed up with
him there will be an inquiry about uh
the disaster of uh October 7th and uh
the main question is how long will guns
and uh his colleagues from the uh Center
center right party uh will offer him the
backing it it will not be very popular
to leave him alone just first of all
because we don't trust him and uh second
of all because Israel the Israeli public
wants to see
unification the people can see
everywhere those Billboards together we
will win and this works for netan and uh
uh I think that it might even take as
long as a year before uh we will have to
stop or before the International
Community will get involved I read very
carefully the opad by President Biden
but I I do hope that he also read what
he
wrote Nal we've only got a minute or two
a minute or two left as we heard the the
pressure from the International
Community on those making the decisions
in Israel is potentially the most
important thing to make sure that this
ceasefire holds and indeed continues
what is your message to those around the
world uh that want to see this piece
last I have sent and along with my
organization the palestin red Cresent um
hundreds of messages to the world
leaders to the International Community
unfortunately nothing happened
unfortunately the world has turned their
back to us and we are still struggling
trying our best to save other people's
life to support Palestinian civilians in
gasp who have been under continuous
bombardments that is taken place day and
night there's no safe place in Gaza we
have been under attack under Target I
have lost four colleagues 24 others were
injured and unfortunately Ely nothing
happened from the International
Community even we are discussing the
situation of hospitals Israel was a
strategically targeting hospitals from
the first moment of this escalation they
have issued 24 evacuation orders for
hospitals in north of Gaza we have
refused the evacuation what happened
they P the hospitals they attacked the
hospitals they open fire at the
hospitals they denied access of
humanitarian Aid and medical supplies
now their goal is is implemented No One
hospital in Gaza and the north is
working all out of service my last call
for the International Community they
should stand up for Humanity this
escalation should put into an end we
need a complete ceasefire an end for
this war because basically Palestinian
civilians are paying the cost of this
continuous escalation none of one
palestinia has not been affected by the
world either you lo you lost your loved
one you lost your home or you became
internally displeased in Gaza this
suffering has to be put to an end well
let's hope that uh the world is
listening to that message thank you so
much uh nabal fasak AKA Elder and no OD
we really do appreciate your time once
again here on Inside Story and thank you
too for watching you can see this
program again anytime by visiting our
website aljazera and for further
discussion go to our Facebook page
that's
facebook.com/ AJ insid story you can
also join the conversation on X our
handle is at AJ insid story for me Tom
McCrae and the whole team here goodbye
for
[Music]
now